So I have this bit of UI and I want
to be able to measure this text area
whenever a user lets go of the mouse,
right?
Why can't I just do
useEffect to measure that?
Well, let's try it.
Let's get useEffect in here.
So, for how the code works,
just looking at this,
You have a width and
a height set as hooks, right?
And then if you remember from previous,
an effect happens immediately
after a render ends.
However, an effect is actually not
synchronously afterwards, right?
So you have the render
function that happens.
There's some pause,
the pause will be milliseconds, right?
It's basically the next tick,
the next frame,
whatever you wanna call it, and
then it'll run your function.
Why is this problematic for
something like this?
So, if I come in here and
do this, save it.
Might be kind of hard to see
over the stream, but if you do,
you'll get kind of like
a ghostly effect there.
You can see it kind of like
bounce a little bit, right?
That's because it's happening twice,
right?
In fact, you can see it there,
even if I'm just clicking on it.
So what layout effect is going to do
is it's going to allow you not have to
wait that like little pause.
It's actually going to happen
immediately after the end.
So actually synchronously after
your render function ends,
your layout effect is going to run.
And so that if you call setState,
inside of that effect you'll get one
rerender instead of two rerenders.
So if I do useLayoutEffect here now,
notice I don't get that ghosting effect
anymore, that's because I'm
calling this inherence.
So I'm actually only getting
one rerender of two rerenders.
You might ask yourself, how is this
useful, the answer is almost never.
[LAUGH] It's really only useful for
exactly what I'm trying to hear,
which is you have something, and you need
to measure something that happens the DOM,
but it can only be measured
after it's been rendered.
That is when layoutEffect is very useful.
Everything else just useEffect.
The other kind of minor caveat,
if you're migrating
something from a class
component to an effect and
it depends on that immediate behavior.
Class components, the component
did mount used to work like this,
actually still works like this, right?
And so sometimes that behavior is
dependent on this immediate synchronous
effect happening.
So useLayoutEffect can be useful for
migrating from class components
to function components where you have
that relied upon order happening.
Otherwise, always useEffects.
I'll be honest with you,
I don't think I've ever
professionally used a layout effect.
I could see where it'd be useful, right?
For something like this, where I'm
actually measuring something happening.
I'm sure you can imagine some animation
where you need to measure how far
something's gonna go inside of a DOM
element, and you need to measure it.
Layout effect is exactly there for that
purpose, everything else just useEffect.
>> So if use memo returns a function and
behaves like useCallBack?
>> Correct, that is exactly true.
So that was layout effect.
Let's take a look at useId.
This one is occasionally useful, and
it's very useful, particularly in
the case I'm about to describe to you.
Let's say you are making
a design system for
your company, right?
For example, Stripe has a design
system that we work on.
And you have some sort of fancy input,
right?
That has a label, it has an input,
it has other stuff that associates
all the stuff together.
A good example, this is associating
together a input and a label, right?
So if you click on the Label,
it highlights the input.
Most of us are familiar
with how that works, right?
If you look at that here,
I have a input, I have a label,
and I have to match the HTML
4 to the ID of the input.
What if I have four different inputs,
I can't just say, ID is equal to 1,
right, because that would make all
of these have the exact same ID,
that doesn't work, right?
So I need some sort of unique identifier
that works in pairs, or not pairs,
but that's internally
consistent to a component, but
I can use it multiple times, right?
Cuz if you look down here,
I'm using this LabelInputPair four times.
Not only that, I need it to work also
on server-side rendering, right?
So I need it to be consistent
across renders and
destinations and all that kind of stuff.
That's why useId is useful.
If I do useID, it will give me back
a unique identifier that will be
consistent within this label input pair,
and
then I can use multiple times
across various different renders.
Does that make sense,
the use case why I need this?
I need an Id, that per instantiation
of a component is consistent.
So for example, I do useId,
you can see my rendering it out here.
This one's r0, r1, r2 r3,
so on and so forth.
And that's how I'm able to
associate that this input,
this one here goes this input here,
this label here goes with this one here.
Otherwise, I'd have to have
my useIdComponent up here.
Have some sort of counter or something
like that that would feed into it,
it'd be get annoying really quickly.
So, that's what useId is for.
I have used this one before
professionally, exactly this,
it's useful for
things like design systems.
And specifically for label and
inputPairs it's very, very useful.
You'll notice its partly hard to see here,
but there's colons here,
they intentionally do that, so
you cannot do CSS selectors on those Ids.
Cuz I knew people would do it and then
they're, we don't want you to do that,
because we're never going to guarantee
you that it's r0 on this computer, and
it's gonna be r0 on that computer as well,
right?
They didn't want that, they want you to
use some other way of selecting things for
CSS, but that's why there's colons
there so that you don't use it for
CSS selectors.
One more thing I was gonna add here.
What happens if I need to
useId multiple times, but
it needs to be inside of one component?
They suggest don't do
const Id2=useId again.
What they suggest is that
const Id2 equals your
id plus some modifier right and
then use that.
I'm just pulling that
directly from the React docs.
They suggest don't use useId multiple
times inside of one component,
cuz it's not necessary.
Yeah, and this is safe across
server-side renders and client-side.
Yeah, Mark.
>> Could it be used for
keys when mapping through an array
if we don't have any unique value?
>> So here's the place where I
envision it could be used as a key.
Let's say I had a select, okay,
I have a select inside of here
instead of an input and
every one of my select has a different,
Array of key or a array of options, right?
I could use that as the key prefix to
whatever set of options that I have.
You will never just like use an id
directly inside of a for loop, right?
Because you remember we don't use
hooks inside of for loops, right?
So I think generally the person's
asking if I'm intuiting
what they're trying to get at, I think
the answer is no, don't useId that way.
But I did wanna carve out that I think
there are occasions where you're
trying to differentiate this
set of options from this
set of options as
holistically different lists.
Probably makes some sense to
use it in that particular case.